Well, this issue first came up in about 57 or 58 in a
discussion with a gentleman who was then vice
president of Duke, but running it, because the
president at that point didn't do much. His name
was Paul M. Gross. And Paul was president of AAAS.
He was an advisor to Eisenhower, chemist, really a
sharp guy. At that time, it must have been, oh, in
his 60s,
suppress a few chuckles about it. Sitting next to
him during that first discussion as to the
possibilities of my appointment to the
department was a man who was the provost of the
university.
And the provost got his degree at Duke University
as a student of Paul Grove. And when the chairman of
the department, who at that time very opposed to
it, made a snide remark about inbreeding. I saw
these two gentlemen take a little twinkle.
I found it very amusing. And apparently, Paul
didn't think of any great risk involved. The next
series of questions I have to ask now have to do with
what you conceive of the role of oceanography to be
in the future. futuristic questions. Those
questions scientists like the least to answer.
First of all, as an administrator and scientist,
what sort of topics in oceanography do you think
will be the so-called hot topics of the future for
which students to operate on? Scientifically.
Scientifically. That is, if nuclear physics, for
example, was the hot topic of the 50s for
oceanographers, which... disciplines of
oceanography are now in ascendance and which are
in decline.
Well, biological oceanography has always been
pretty far down on the list, in part because of the
nature of the people who work in it, and in part
because it does not provide a direct link to
economic development and the gross national
product, which the geological crowd do. And the
military have supported, say, physical
oceanography because of their own interests,
especially in the realm of the Navy, which is fine.
That's their business.
I think we have finished or are finishing what
might be construed as a survey period. We have
amassed unbelievable amounts
there, but primarily what is there. And now I will
not be at all surprised to see a greater emphasis on
subdivisions
of
why is the animal there, what permits it to live and
reproduce there, how did it get there in the first
place, and what does it do there.
to begin to look into that and then within that I'm
sure we will see a variety of assaults or little
forays out into the beyond the frontier on far more
molecular questions as to are there common
denominators among certain marine forms that
permit them to do similar things. And this is
coming from thoughts about marine fouling, for
example. Is it possible to find a common
biochemical denominator that would answer some
of the questions of fouling and provide us with a
mechanism for controlling it? For years, the Navy
has put all sorts of money into anti-fouling
paints where you dump compound A into paint. If
that doesn't work, you try B. You don't really know
why you try B, but somebody thinks it's a good idea.
And you can do that ad nauseum at the rate at which
the chemical industry is developing compounds,
but it's a rather empirical approach which hasn't
produced any really good results. So I think we
will see more and more effort in that particular
realm in looking at the regulatory mechanisms
live within a particular environment? What are
the clues that they get, like in the old problem of
vertical migration and the scattering layer?
What tells the animals to do what they do? And now
you're getting into a whole interdisciplinary,
managed team research theme. And I think if IDOE is
successful, and I'm not sure how you're going to
measure it or who will measure it, But we will see
more emphasis on trying to bring together groups
of scientists across disciplinary lines to look
at some of the big problems and hopefully leaving
the individual scientist to still do his thing.
Because a lot of the real innovative, creative
thinking is done by that guy who just sits and
thinks about it for a while and comes up with an
approach that the team would never come up with as a
whole.
Now, specifically, I don't know that I can say.
Second, what technological breakthroughs, if
any, do you consider instrumental in changing
oceanography, or the discipline of
oceanography, or the approach of the discipline
of oceanography in the last
Well, outside of biological oceanography,
certainly things like side scanning sonar have
been major breakthroughs and have given us tools
to do things that we could never have done before.
The Alvin gets us into a part of the oceans which we
have just explored by wire before. And I will not be
surprised to see a greater interest in the proper
use of submersibles. I think that they have been
considered pretty much of a toy by some people, and
the results which have come from them leave much to
be desired. But with the 200-mile limit and a
further interest in the seabed and life in the
abyssal deeps, I assume that we will go in that
direction. And there certainly is good
justification for it, if it's a program that is
properly developed. In the realm of biological
oceanography, unfortunately, I'm hard-pressed
to point out any real major breakthrough. Now, you
can look at the development of teams as a major
breakthrough, because biologists do not
normally lend themselves to big team research,
but the Quayer group apparently have been able to
do this. And the interrelationships between the
chemists, the physicists, and the biologists in
that program suggest that under the right
conditions, with the right personalities, and
the right idiosyncrasies, it can be done. And it's
the only way to answer some of the big problems.
What do you see as the role of systematics in marine
biology? Do you see that declining or increasing?
Well, in reality, I see it as declining, but it's
unfortunate. And we will find out that we were
wrong in permitting it to decline.
When all is said and done, you still must know what
you're working with, whether you're a chemist
working with some organic compound or a biologist
working with some animal. And if you cannot
properly identify that, be it a chemical compound
or an animal, Nobody else will know what you're
talking about, and you won't either. So I think we
may see, we have seen the bottom of the curve
insofar as systematics is concerned. And I would
like to think that we will begin to see renewed
emphasis on systematics, perhaps with a slightly
different twist. it'll still serve the same
function, to be able to identify animals and
relate them to the rest of the animal kingdom. And
what slightly different twist do you see attached
to it? Anything specific? Oh, people are already
looking at the use of computers and other tools,
and there's nothing really new about it. What
about the impact of computer data on such things as
physical oceanography? It has been suggested
that computer data will soon eliminate that great
age of exploration, that is, of... No, I think
it'll just give us a better focus, because before
we've been, well, like the title of the
U.S.-Soviet thing, of the world's oceans, we've
been trying to look at the whole ocean, which is
ridiculous. A number of recent discoveries off
here point out quite conclusively that there are
all sorts of far more localized phenomena that
deserve attention before we can begin to put them
all together as pieces representing the dynamics
of the oceans. It has also been suggested, too,
that new 200-mile limits, new international
pressures, may turn people back once more to the
coastal shelves, the geographic entities which
were not too popular among biologists, marine
biologists and oceanographers in decades past.
Would you agree with that? Yeah, but I would add one
other motivating force, and that is politics and
support. we saw in the middle of the 60s the
beginning of a trend on the part of the Congress
which said, in essence, you guys have gotten all
this money. Now what do you do with it other than
figure out that the oceans are deep and that
there's something living at the bottom? What's
that got to do with us? And I will not be at all
surprised if we see a greater emphasis on the part
of the funding agencies the research that has been
deep ocean, moving in toward land where it has some
connection with the real world that the
congressman can understand and that may have a
direct bearing on the country which is providing
the support.
And I don't object to that at all.
And that was the next question. Do you think the
return to coastal water is particularly good?
Now, you said earlier in the interview that,
in effect, it was coastal waters which produced
the most of what man needs. Do you think the
economic crunch, now allow me to say that, is the
fuel crisis, the energy shortage, and the food
crisis all will turn us back more to coastal waters
and oceanography and away from deep water
activity? Yeah, I just hope that it's not a
complete turnaround, because there's still an
awful lot that we need to know about deep oceans.
And it would be a real disaster if an ultimatum were
to come out tomorrow saying that, henceforth, you
could only work within 300 meters or something.
And all too frequently, this is what happens, that
when the pendulum swings, it goes crunch. It
doesn't swing just 2 thirds of the way. There are
very definite needs in the coastal waters, and
they will not be resolved if all of us are out
looking 5,000 meters. Now, several things on
which I'd like a quick opinion on from you. Mining
the ocean floors, that is, the ocean excluding
coastal waters as a source of minerals for
mankind. Are you optimistic or not optimistic?
You said excluding coastal waters. Excluding
coastal waters. The second question is coastal
waters. First excluding coastal waters, then
coastal waters. Well, I don't know that as the
technology is presently developed, we have, with
the exception of oil, the machinery to mine the
deep oceans. Now, 10 years from now, we may. But
it's going to have to be something that is really in
short supply before the economics of it will make
it feasible. It's like mining the moon.
Presumably, we can do that too if we want to, but can
you afford anything that comes off of it? Now,
coastal waters, very definitely. And to me, it's a
matter of real concern in this state, for example.
We know that sizable phosphate deposits are
located under coastal waters, which are the
property of the state of North Carolina held in
trust for the citizens of the state.
The efforts thus far toward phosphate mining in
particular have been
very, well, they have resulted in deleterious
effects to the environment. And I'm trying to
encourage the state to take the OPEC attitude
toward phosphates under the coastal waters. That
if somebody really wants it, they can pay for it.
But it is a non-renewable resource. And that
provision should be made to reimburse the
citizens of this state and replace the estuaries
that they will tear up in the process of mining. But
nobody cares about that yet. They will.
But it's quite feasible, and it's right down the
road, there's no doubt about it. Okay. Besides
phosphates and oil, which are all accurately
named, can you think of other mineral resources
which will be available off the coastal shores?
Oh, the chances are good it's like everything
else. Thus far, our efforts have been expended
largely toward oil and phosphate. And in looking
for them, we've most likely overlooked a variety
of other things. And if we find other things, which
there's no reason why we shouldn't, then again, if
it's economically feasible and profitable,
people will begin to develop the techniques to
mine them. What about plankton and kelp? These are
two words that appear frequently in the
vocabulary of the 60s in terms of potential food
sources and other valuable resources. A comment
on those? Well, on the East Coast, of course,
and will undoubtedly provide a number of things
that will be useful, but I don't know on what scale.
Plankton, directly, no. This is, well, it's a
little too far down on the food chain to make it
worthwhile in the, well, if you look at a whale,
in order to pick up the plankton necessary to
sustain it. And I would not advocate that we
develop a mechanical whale to do this, because the
energy expended in driving the whale would far
exceed the return in terms of the plankton.
Now, finally, do you feel as if, or in your opinion,
let me say this, in your opinion, Has the glory
years of oceanography peaked? That is, the number
of people enrolled in schools, the number of
supports going to receive from federal agencies.
Is that a thing of the past? No, I don't think so. I
think it's, like everything else in this world,
it's a cycle. And for years, politicians and
biopoliticians have been talking about the 70% of
the Earth's globe is covered with the oceans and
what it can mean to the future of civilization. And
it's sort of a pretty well worn out phrase, but it's
still true. And I think with the 200 mile limit and a
variety of other political developments, we're
going to see a long term interest in the oceans. And
there will continue to be varying demands on
numbers of oceanographers and for numbers of
oceanographers. I think that we may have seen an
end to the period of exploration for purely
academic reasons, as we know it. But we will see
more and more emphasis on utilization of the
ocean.
to me a relatively young science, one of the few
that is truly international and has been since it
was first conceived. And this, to me, will be the
thing that will sustain it.
Now, what about the picture collection? Okay.
Gunnar Thorsen, for many years, carried with him a
movie camera. And any place he was in a group of more
than three scientists, he proceeded to take a
30-second shot of individuals in the group. And he
left his widow a sizable collection of film that
involves big names in the realm of European
and others who are oceanographers. It would
include a lot of oceanographers. And that film, to
my knowledge, just sits. I wrote her and asked her
if there were any plans for any kind of editing and,
you know, the release of some sort of a 30-minute
film of oceanographers or something. She said she
had turned it over, I think, to the University of
Copenhagen and kept a copy for herself. But it
would be a shame to let something like that just sit
when a group like yours might be able to get a copy of
it and develop it with a little technical
assistance, perhaps, into a really good
documentary film of trends in oceanography since
World War II or something like that. Because it
would include a lot of people who are now gone. It
surely would. Including Gunnar himself. I assume
he's on there. I don't know how he did his own
picture. But there are a good number of people, of
course, very important oceanography have died in
the last four years. And he covered the globe more
than any other man for his time. He was involved in
the development of the Thai-Danish cooperative
program. He was down there talking about the Suez
Canal and a cooperative study of the Suez Canal
between all sorts of people years ago. I mean, it
was amazing what that guy did with a lot of help from
people like F.G. Walton and Hilary Moore and Kenna
and all over the place. But if you ever get an
interest in it, let me know, because I knew her,
still do, reasonably well. And I could serve as a
catalyst on that front. I think I'm going to talk to
Cal Houn about that. Nothing else. Copies of that
film ought to be placed in archives like Duke or
Texas A&M or someplace so I can afford to put it so
that it would be here in this country available
later on in the future. Well, do you have anything
else you'd like to say? Any comments you'd like to
make in oceanography and about oceanography in
general or anything in particular? Well, one
thing you didn't touch on, which I'm sure you're
aware of, but relatively speaking, the
oceanographic community is very small. And I'm
convinced that this, coupled with the
international aspects of it, have contributed to
what little success we may be able to point to.
Because if I drop down in the middle of Hamburg
tomorrow, I will meet people I know, who know
people I know, who have worked with other people
that I know, and who know me and so forth. And it's
really amazing. at even one of the big
oceanographic conferences, how relatively
small the number is and how intertwined it all is.
Now, of course, it breaks pretty much into
physical, geological, chemical, and
biological.
and vice versa. The geological oceanographers
somehow tend to be a little more communicative, in
part, I think, because they have mutual needs.
Chemists, some. But if you go to a meeting of ASZ,
there are far more people and far less
communication than you have with limnology and
oceanography, say, or ASO. And at some point, it
would be interesting just for fun, I think, to see
if there is any kind of a relationship between
numbers and
the communication that we enjoy within the
oceanographic community. I know some of the early
relationships between the Soviets and the US were
purely coincidence. A US ship would stop at Dakar.
before Big Brother could realize what was going
on, the two communities had gotten together in a
pub someplace and were having a drink. And they
were exchanging all sorts of scientific
information and agreeing, OK, now next month
we're going to be in some place. We'll see you then.
And a lot of the things that started early in the
game between the Soviet Union and the United
States started that way. And it wouldn't have been
possible if it hadn't been for the international
nature and spread of facilities such as ships.
No, I wasn't aware of that at all. And people like
Howie Sanders, Woods Hole, knew and talked with
Soviet scientists long before the government
ever considered that such a thing might be a good
idea. And it goes on all the time.
And now, of course, it's loosely accepted, at
least by their government. But in the old days, it
wasn't, and it happened in spite of them.
Which I guess, if you want to take it back into its
historical days, is the same sort of thing that has
happened traditionally in the seafaring
communities. Apprentices would sneak out of a
country by ship someplace and take their
knowledge of the silver trade over to another
country and seafaring men would pull into a dock
and pick up the latest news of revolution and take
it home. The same sort of thing. It's a real loose
crowd. It's a pretty independent crowd. It's a
pretty
self-starting crowd.
And it's something about the sea, I think, that
encourages this. Now, of course, your discussion
today denied this, but my impression certainly
was that a growing specialization among
oceanographers was tending to break up this
community. Well, I don't see it. But maybe it's
because I'm not as much one of the Well,
I don't consider myself to be on the in-group of the
big oceanographic institutions, and it doesn't
bother me any. But it may well be that if you were to
talk to people like Paul Fein, Woods Hole, Art
Maxwell, and that crap, who are the kingpins of
oceanography in a big sense, yeah, they may see it
that way. But I'm sort of standing on the periphery
looking at it from a far more overview standpoint
than I would expect they would be.
Well, one of the attractions of oceanography was,
and then one of the international attractions
too, was that oceanographers were an academic
discipline, had to have advice from other people.
Right.
Because with a common ground in the ocean, they had
to know somebody who could do chemistry. Even
though they might know what chemistry was about,
they couldn't do it if they were going to get any
help. And I think you get constant injections of
new ideas this way. You don't get into a rut. And if
the day comes when we do, then we're really in
trouble. But I think there are enough young,
independent, on occasion abrasive, scientists
who will not let that happen, and their day will
come soon.